technical-hiring/index.md, before:

# Make Your Technical Hiring Process Suck at Least 20% Less

## Dave Rolsky

------

# Looking for a Job

------

# <span style='font-family: "Noto Sans Kannada"'>(ಥ_ಥ)</span>
<!-- .slide: data-background-color="#0000ff" -->

------

# Started Applying

------

# <span style='font-family: "Noto Sans Kannada"'>(ノಠ益ಠ)ノ彡┻━┻</span>
<!-- .slide: data-background-color="#ff2200" -->

------

# Why?

------

# Lack of Basic Courtesy

------

# Unprepared Interviewers

------

# Pointless Questions

------

# Wasted Time

------

# Very Little Skill Evaluation

------

# Sloooooooooooooooow

------

# Took a Job In Spite of, Not Because

------

# It Can Be Less Terrible

------

# Why Bother?
<!-- .slide: data-background-color="#000000" -->

------

# Wasting Your Own Time

------

# False Positives Are Expensive

------

# False Negatives Are Missed Opportunities

------

# Bad Hiring Turns Candidates Off

------

# How To Start?
<!-- .slide: data-background-color="#000000" -->

------

# Figure Out What You Want

------

# Evaluation Criteria

Note:
* Technical skills, obviously
  * Anything specific? Make sure to cover these somehow!
* Knowledge about your domain, optionally
* Good communication skills
   * Need to be able to collaborate effectively with other technical staff
   * May also need to be able to communicate with non-technical staff
   * Writing and organization skills
* We will come back to this again

------

# Everyone Should Agree

Note:
* Everyone involved in hiring should agree on this rubric and commit to using it to evaluate candidates
    * Do not assume that everyone is on the same page as you. Have a meeting or two to discuss and create this rubric.

------

# Job Posting

Note:
* Clear Requirements and Benefits in Posting
    * Be very careful about what is really a *required* skill
        * Good people learn new technologies quickly
        * Sometimes you need someone to *teach* your team a technology
    * I prefer optional "nice to haves" over required
    * Do they really need a degree? why?
* Clear Description of Work
    * size of team
    * new code, old code, both
    * technologies
    * interaction with non-technical folks
* Remote or Not

------

# Include A Salary Range

------

# Pre-Interview Screening
<!-- .slide: data-background-color="#000000" -->

------

# Remember Your Criteria

------

# Send Responses Quickly!

Note:
* Send people a thank you immediately - automated response is best
* Send them a rejection as soon as possible - stop jerking people around
* Move on to next steps as quickly as possible

------

# Technical Pre-Screening

Note:
* The goal here is to figure out if people have at least some level of coding skill
* You cannot get any sense of someone's coding skill without actually having them do real work
    * Making them do real work during an interview is cruel (more on that later)
    * There are lots of really nice people who would be great co-workers, except that they cannot code their way out of a brown paper bag

------

# Homework or Code Samples

Note:
* Should not take more than 3 hours to complete
* Do the homework yourself - ask a few other folks on the team to do it too

------

# Prepare to Evaluate the Homework

https://github.com/maxmind/dev-hire-homework

------

# Homework Instructions Must Be Detailed

Note:
* If someone does something different from what you expected check the instructions

------

# Code Samples Must Be Substantial

Note:
* Only substantial libraries or apps
* PRs are a plus, but it's not the same as their own work

------

# Should Everyone Do the Homework?

Note:
* Okay to have everyone do the homework, but this will cause attrition

------

# Interviews
<!-- .slide: data-background-color="#000000" -->

------

# Make a List of Questions

------

# To Every Question a Reason

------

# To Every Criterion a Question

------

# Be Prepared<br>(Read the F***ing Resume)

------

# Coordinate the Process in Advance

Note:
* Who will ask questions (one person? everyone?)
* What types of questions you'll ask
* What types of questions you won't ask
* What you're looking for
* When they can ask their own questions (you must make sure there is time for this!)

------

# Group Interviews

Note:
* These are fine, but be very organized about it.
    * Having one person ask all the questions is okay
    * Having multiple people ask questions is okay too, just agree in advance on who asks what
    * If you're doing the interview online, have a chat channel for backchat so someone can say "I want to ask X"

------

# Politeness 101

Note:
* Introductions
    * Everyone on the interview should introduce themselves, I suggest:
        * Name
        * Position in the company
        * Relationship to the potential hire ("I'd be your manager") if that's not obvious
        * How long you've been with the company
        * Where you live (for remote teams)

------

# Start By Telling Them About the Interview

------

> Our goal is to learn more about you and for you to learn more about us and the position. We will not be asking stumper-type technical questions, nor are we looking for someone who fits a specific mold. If you have any questions during the interview please feel free to ask them as they occur to you. We’ll also make sure to leave time at the end of the interview for you to ask questions.

------

# What Can You Learn in An Interview?

------

# Does the candidate want this particular job?

------

# Can the candidate communicate effectively?

------

# Do they care about technical stuff, but not **too much**?

------

# What are the most important things for them in a position?

------

# What reservations do they have about this position?

------

# What Questions Did They Ask You?

------

# Some Specific Questions I Ask

Note:
* What appeals to you about this position?
* What are the most important things for you in a position?
* What reservations do you have about this position?
* What programming languages have you used? Which was your favorite? Why? Tell us some things you don't like about your favorite?
* What is one of the hardest technical problems you've solved?
* Tell us about one of the dirtiest hacks you’ve ever implemented. How would you go back and fix it?
* Describe what you think an ideal development workflow would look like.

------

# The Unfolding Technical Question

Note:
* Let's sketch out a design for X.
    * Be prepared to answer *their* questions about the system
* Gradually make it more complicated:
    * What if the system has to operate across multiple data centers?
    * How do you handle updates from multiple users at once?
    * What happens if the batch system dies 6 hours into a 12 hour process?
    * How would you instrument the system to better analyze problems?
    * How would you test the system?
    * What if you have to accomodate a 10x increase in traffic, users, data?

------

# Culture Fit Is Bullshit

Note:
* This is a very nebulous term.
* Break this down into narrower things you can more easily evaluate:
    * spoken communication skills
    * interest in technology (or specific technologies)
    * work/life balance goals
    * etc.

------

# Puzzles Are Bullshit

Note:
* Every question you ask should have a purpose. Brain teasers do not relate very closely to the work they will be doing, so what could you possibly learn from this?

------

# Overly Specific Questions Are Bullshit

Note:
* If it can be quickly looked up online, do not ask about it. 
* Ability to memorize specific algorithms, data structures, or APIs does not correlate very closely to their ability to do the work.

------

# Whiteboard Coding Is Bullshit

Note:
* Lots has been written on this.
* It's a totally unrealistic environment.
* You're not actually testing them on anything like real work.
* It's very stressful and cruel
* Note that sketching out a system architecture or something on a whiteboard is fine. That's what whiteboards are for, and that's like doing real work!

------

# Live Coding is Bullshit (Mostly)

Note:
* Hey, at least it's not on a whiteboard
* But it's still very stressful and cruel
* There is one exception

------

# Pairing

Note:
* Pair on something they're familiar with
    * homework
    * coding samples
* Good way to actually work with someone

------

# Too Many Interviews Is Too Many

Note:
* Fewer interviews is better
    * quicker
    * less stressful for the candidate
* But if there's a person with less free time (like the CEO or CTO) who really wants to interview promising candidates, you may need to do this

------

# Post-Interview

Note:
* Remember your evaluation criteria
* Make a decision as quickly as possible

------

# Summary
<!-- .slide: data-background-color="#000000" -->

------

# Be prepared

------

# Don't waste your time

------

# Don't waste their time

------

# Agree on Evaluation Criteria

------

# Suck At Least 20% Less

------

# Questions?

Commit message:

A few more tweaks to technical hiring slides

technical-hiring/index.md, after:

# Make Your Technical Hiring Process Suck at Least 20% Less

## Dave Rolsky

------

## I Work at ActiveState

## But All Opinions Are Mine Alone

------

# Looking for a Job

------

# <span style='font-family: "Noto Sans Kannada"'>(ಥ_ಥ)</span>
<!-- .slide: data-background-color="#0000ff" -->

------

# Started Applying

------

# <span style='font-family: "Noto Sans Kannada"'>(ノಠ益ಠ)ノ彡┻━┻</span>
<!-- .slide: data-background-color="#ff2200" -->

------

# Why?

------

# Lack of Basic Courtesy

------

# Unprepared Interviewers

------

# Pointless Questions

------

# Wasted Time

------

# Very Little Skill Evaluation

------

# Sloooooooooooooooow

------

# Took a Job In Spite of, Not Because

------

# It Can Be Less Terrible

------

# Why Bother?
<!-- .slide: data-background-color="#000000" -->

------

# Wasting Your Own Time

------

# False Positives Are Expensive

------

# False Negatives Are Missed Opportunities

------

# Bad Hiring Turns Candidates Off

------

# Hiring Is the Most Important Thing You Do!

------

# How To Start?
<!-- .slide: data-background-color="#000000" -->

------

# Figure Out What You Want

------

# Evaluation Criteria

Note:
* Technical skills, obviously
  * Anything specific? Make sure to cover these somehow!
* Knowledge about your domain, optionally
* Good communication skills
   * Need to be able to collaborate effectively with other technical staff
   * May also need to be able to communicate with non-technical staff
   * Writing and organization skills
* We will come back to this again

------

# Everyone Should Agree

Note:
* Everyone involved in hiring should agree on this rubric and commit to using it to evaluate candidates
    * Do not assume that everyone is on the same page as you. Have a meeting or two to discuss and create this rubric.

------

# Job Posting

Note:
* Clear Requirements and Benefits in Posting
    * Be very careful about what is really a *required* skill
        * Good people learn new technologies quickly
        * Sometimes you need someone to *teach* your team a technology
    * I prefer optional "nice to haves" over required
    * Do they really need a degree? why?
* Clear Description of Work
    * size of team
    * new code, old code, both
    * technologies
    * interaction with non-technical folks
* Remote or Not

------

# Include A Salary Range

------

# Pre-Interview Screening
<!-- .slide: data-background-color="#000000" -->

------

# Remember Your Criteria

------

# Send Responses Quickly!

Note:
* Send people a thank you immediately - automated response is best
* Send them a rejection as soon as possible - stop jerking people around
* Move on to next steps as quickly as possible

------

# Technical Pre-Screening

Note:
* The goal here is to figure out if people have at least some level of coding skill
* You cannot get any sense of someone's coding skill without actually having them do real work
    * Making them do real work during an interview is cruel (more on that later)
    * There are lots of really nice people who would be great co-workers, except that they cannot code their way out of a brown paper bag

------

# Homework or Code Samples

Note:
* Should not take more than 3 hours to complete
* Do the homework yourself - ask a few other folks on the team to do it too

------

# Prepare to Evaluate the Homework

https://github.com/maxmind/dev-hire-homework

------

# Homework Instructions Must Be Detailed

Note:
* If someone does something different from what you expected check the instructions

------

# Code Samples Must Be Substantial

Note:
* Only substantial libraries or apps
* PRs are a plus, but it's not the same as their own work

------

# Should Everyone Do the Homework?

Note:
* Okay to have everyone do the homework, but this will cause attrition

------

# Interviews
<!-- .slide: data-background-color="#000000" -->

------

# Make a List of Questions

------

# To Every Question a Reason

------

# To Every Criterion a Question

------

# Be Prepared<br>(Read the F***ing Resume)

------

# Coordinate the Process in Advance

Note:
* Who will ask questions (one person? everyone?)
* What types of questions you'll ask
* What types of questions you won't ask
* What you're looking for
* When they can ask their own questions (you must make sure there is time for this!)

------

# Group Interviews

Note:
* These are fine, but be very organized about it.
    * Having one person ask all the questions is okay
    * Having multiple people ask questions is okay too, just agree in advance on who asks what
    * If you're doing the interview online, have a chat channel for backchat so someone can say "I want to ask X"

------

# Politeness 101

Note:
* Introductions
    * Everyone on the interview should introduce themselves, I suggest:
        * Name
        * Position in the company
        * Relationship to the potential hire ("I'd be your manager") if that's not obvious
        * How long you've been with the company
        * Where you live (for remote teams)

------

# Start By Telling Them About the Interview

------

> Our goal is to learn more about you and for you to learn more about us and the position. We will not be asking stumper-type technical questions, nor are we looking for someone who fits a specific mold. If you have any questions during the interview please feel free to ask them as they occur to you. We’ll also make sure to leave time at the end of the interview for you to ask questions.

------

# What Can You Learn in An Interview?

------

# Does the candidate want this particular job?

------

# Can the candidate communicate effectively?

------

# Do they care about technical stuff, but not **too much**?

------

# What are the most important things for them in a position?

------

# What reservations do they have about this position?

------

# What Questions Did They Ask You?

------

# Some Specific Questions I Ask

Note:
* What appeals to you about this position?
* What are the most important things for you in a position?
* What reservations do you have about this position?
* What programming languages have you used? Which was your favorite? Why? Tell us some things you don't like about your favorite?
* What is one of the hardest technical problems you've solved?
* Tell us about one of the dirtiest hacks you’ve ever implemented. How would you go back and fix it?
* Describe what you think an ideal development workflow would look like.

------

# The Unfolding Technical Question

Note:
* Let's sketch out a design for X.
    * Be prepared to answer *their* questions about the system
* Gradually make it more complicated:
    * What if the system has to operate across multiple data centers?
    * How do you handle updates from multiple users at once?
    * What happens if the batch system dies 6 hours into a 12 hour process?
    * How would you instrument the system to better analyze problems?
    * How would you test the system?
    * What if you have to accomodate a 10x increase in traffic, users, data?

------

# Culture Fit Is Bullshit

Note:
* This is a very nebulous term.
* Break this down into narrower things you can more easily evaluate:
    * spoken communication skills
    * interest in technology (or specific technologies)
    * work/life balance goals
    * etc.

------

# Puzzles Are Bullshit

Note:
* Every question you ask should have a purpose. Brain teasers do not relate very closely to the work they will be doing, so what could you possibly learn from this?

------

# Overly Specific Questions Are Bullshit

Note:
* If it can be quickly looked up online, do not ask about it. 
* Ability to memorize specific algorithms, data structures, or APIs does not correlate very closely to their ability to do the work.

------

# Whiteboard Coding Is Bullshit

Note:
* Lots has been written on this.
* It's a totally unrealistic environment.
* You're not actually testing them on anything like real work.
* It's very stressful and cruel
* Note that sketching out a system architecture or something on a whiteboard is fine. That's what whiteboards are for, and that's like doing real work!

------

# Live Coding is Bullshit (Mostly)

Note:
* Hey, at least it's not on a whiteboard
* But it's still very stressful and cruel
* There is one exception

------

# Pairing

Note:
* Pair on something they're familiar with
    * homework
    * coding samples
* Good way to actually work with someone

------

# Too Many Interviews Is Too Many

Note:
* Fewer interviews is better
    * quicker
    * less stressful for the candidate
* But if there's a person with less free time (like the CEO or CTO) who really wants to interview promising candidates, you may need to do this

------

# Post-Interview

Note:
* Remember your evaluation criteria
* Make a decision as quickly as possible

------

# Summary
<!-- .slide: data-background-color="#000000" -->

------

# Be prepared

------

# Agree on Evaluation Criteria

------

# Don't waste your time

------

# Don't waste their time

------

# Suck At Least 20% Less

------

# Thank You
